### Introduction

Why does the piece begin where it begins and end where it ends? Is the audience led through a series of ideas, progressing from familiar to unfamiliar, good to bad? Is the piece primarily narrative, expository, or analytical? Is the narrative chronological, or has the author chosen to move backwards or jump around? The answers to all of these questions have an impact of the overall line of reasoning in a text, or the way an author structures and organizes the main ideas in the text. In this lesson, we'll discuss several different ways to establish a clear line of reasoning.   

#### Objectives

- Describe the line of reasoning and explain whether it supports an argument’s overarching thesis.
- Recognize and explain the use of methods of development to accomplish a purpose.


### Types of Reasoning

There are two main types of reasoning that an author might employ when establishing their line of reasoning: inductive and deductive.

#### Inductive

[Inductive reasoning](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62389&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Inductive reasoning") takes a specific representative example or case, then makes generalizations or conclusions based on that example. For this type of reasoning to be effective, it needs to be supported by significant reliable [evidence](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62310&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Evidence") and consider situations when the generalization or conclusion may not be true or sufficient. It should also be as specific as possible in terms of its conclusion. For example, we wouldn't want to use an example of a situation with one student to make a generalized argument about all students; instead, we would want to describe the circumstances surrounding the situation thoroughly, and argue that the generalization would apply to a student in a similar situation.

#### Deductive

In [deductive reasoning](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62390&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Deductive reasoning"), the opposite occurs: a generalization or conclusion is applied to a specific example. Using [deductive reasoning](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62390&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Deductive reasoning"), one would likely predict what would occur in a situation based on the generalization. In other words, if one thing happened in many situations, it would likely occur in another similar one as well.

### Methods of Development

Selecting the most effective way of organizing an essay, or a [method of development](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62406&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Method of development"), is crucial to establishing a clear and persuasive line of reasoning. Some methods of development include:

- narration
- [cause and effect](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62402&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Cause and effect")
- [compare and contrast](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62403&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Compare and contrast")
- description or definition
- problem/solution
- order of importance or complexity
- logical by topics/[claims](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62309&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Claims")
- combination
- sequence or chronological
- ### Narration, Cause and Effect, Comparison, and Description

Watch the video below to learn more about using narration, [cause and effect](https://mycourses.cty.jhu.edu/mod/glossary/showentry.php?eid=62402&displayformat=dictionary "Key Terms and Concepts: Cause and effect"), comparison, and description as methods of development.

### Other Ways of Organizing an Essay

Not all pieces of writing fit into the methods described in the video lesson. For these situations, consider organizing your essay using one of the methods below. You can, of course, combine two of these methods. You might use narration as your main method, but relate the experience how it occurred chronologically, for example. Click on each method below for a brief description of it.


## Problem and solution

Organizing an essay in problem and solution format is exactly how it sounds: describe a problem, then propose and explain your solution to it. This method works best when one is making a claim of policy, or suggesting a specific behavior or change. In terms of this course, you might organize an Argument or Synthesis essay in this way, but not a rhetorical analysis essay.

## Order of importance or complexity

Sometimes, you recognize that some of your claims are more consequential than others. In these cases, if there are no other clear ways to organize your essay, you might choose to present your most important claims first and last, and place your less persuasive pieces in between. Or, you might realize some of your claims are easier or harder to understand, and want to explain the easier pieces first to help your reader grasp the more complex bits. This method can be used for any of the three essay types.

## Sequence or chronological

This method is a bit harder to make work in any of the essay types for this course, but it is possible. It works well with essays discussing something of historical significance, or situations in which one event prompted another. For example, in a synthesis free-response on monolingual English speakers like you responded to in Unit 1, you might consider chronological organization if you want to show how perspectives on monoligual English speakers have changed over time. Or, in an argument essay responding to Unit 2's prompt, you may have discussed how ownership may have contributed productively to identity in the past, but it damages a sense of self today. Do not use this method for rhetorical analysis essays.


## Logical by topics and claims

If none of the others seem to work, simply organize by topics or claims. This is the broadest organizational method, and it merely asks that you stick to one topic per paragraph. In a rhetorical analysis essay, for example, it might mean discussing diction and its effects in one paragraph, and comparisons and its effects in another. If you can use another method along with this one, you will likely offer a more sophisticated essay. This method will work for any of the three essay types.



. . . The premise of world building is that the shape of the material world we design, build, and use together both expresses and determines who inhabits it and how we use it to exercise the duties and privileges of citizenship within that world. Modern culture in the U.S. and other developed and developing societies is now undertaking two contradictory world building initiatives that are expressed in social, legislative, material, cultural and attitudinal practices. 

One initiative, which I call inclusive world building, seeks to integrate people with disabilities into the public world by creating an accessible, barrier-free material environment. Inclusive world building frames disability as valued social diversity and supports the civil and human rights-based understanding of disability . . . which aims to integrate people with disabilities as full citizens. 

In contrast to this inclusion initiative, is the initiative I call eugenic world building, which strives to eliminate disability and, along with it, people with disabilities from human communities through varying social and material practices that range from seemingly benign to egregiously unethical. Restrictive environments that segregate people with disabilities from one another and from the nondisabled are one form of eugenic world building. Scientific and medical technologies are another form – for example, genetic manipulation, selective abortion, and medical normalization justified by the idea that social improvement and freedom of choice require eliminating devalued human traits in the interest of reducing human suffering, increasing life quality, and building a more desirable citizenry. . .  

. . . Why, eugenic logic asks, should the world we build together include disability at all? Our dominant understanding is that disability confers pain, disease, functional limitation, disadvantage, and social stigma; limits opportunities; and reduces quality of life. Eugenic logic tells us that our world would be a better place if disability could be eliminated. Enacted worldwide in policies and practices that range from segregation to extermination, the aim of eugenics is to eliminate disability and, by extension, disabled people from the world. . . .